How To Find How Much Disk Space A File Or Folder Uses In Linux

Introduction
This guide will show you how to find out the amount of disk space a file or folder is taking up using the Linux command line.

Find Out The File Sizes Of All Files And Folders
The du command summarises the disk usage of each file. 

In its simplest form you can simply run the following command:

du

This will scroll through all of the files and folders within the present working directory. For each file that is displayed a file size will be shown alongside it and at the bottom the total file size will be displayed.

To find out how much space is used on the whole drive you can start at the root folder by using the following command:

du /

You may need to use sudo along with the du command to elevate your permissions as follows:

sudo du /

The main issue with the above command is that it will only list the file size of the sub folders and not the files within them.

To get a complete listing use one of the following commands:

du -a

du --all

You can get the output to scroll in pages by using the more command or the less command as follows:

du | more

du | less

Find Out The File Size Of Individual Files And Folders
If you just want to find out the disk usage used by a single file you can specify the file name along with the du command as follows.

du /path/to/file

For example

du image.png

The output will be something like this:

36 image.png

If you enter a foldername along with the du command you get a list of all files in the folder.

88 Steam/logs

92 Steam

The above shows that the Steam folder has a logs folder which has a size of 88 and the total for the Steam folder is 92.

It doesn't list the files in the logs folder. To get the list of files you would need to use the following command:

du -a Steam

The results are now as follows:

84 Steam/logs/bootstrap_log.txt

88 Steam/logs

92 Steam

Change The Output Of The File Size
By default the file sizes are listed as kilobytes. You can change the block-size to other values as follows:

du -BM <filename>

For example I have a file called "zorin.iso" which by default is 1630535680 in size.

du -BM zorin.iso

The above command outputs the size as 1556M.

You can also use K or G as follows:

du -BK zorin.iso

du -BG zorin.iso

In kilobytes the zorin.iso file is listed as 159232K.

In gigabytes the zorin.iso file is listed as 2G

There are in fact 8 possible settings which are as follows:

K - Kilobytes
M - Megabytes
G - Gigabytes
T - Terabytes
P - Petabytes
E - Exabytes
Z - Zetabytes
Y - Yottabyte
If you are getting a list of files trying to get the correct display size is difficult. For example a file of 100 bytes needs to be displayed as bytes but a file which is 16 gigabytes would be better shown in gigabytes.

To get the appropriate file size based on the file being displayed use one of the following commands:

du -h <filename>

du --human-readble <filename>

Summarise The Output
You can get the du command to show the total size of the files and folders by using the following commands:

du -c

du --total

You can also eliminate most of the other output such as the listing of files and folders by using the following commands:

du -s

du --summarize

Summary
You can find out more about the du command by running the man command in the terminal as follows:

man du

Another command you may wish to read about is the df command which reports file system and disk space usage. 